
__module 1__

aws 

-you only pay for what you use 

cloud computing = on demand delivery of IT resources over the internet
with pay as you go pricing

aws shared responsibilty model 
aws is responsible for -> security of cloud
customer is responsible for-> security in the cloud 

regions and az(availability zones)

__module 2__

amazon elastic compute cloud (ec2)

compute = refers to the processing power needed to run applications, 
manage data, and perform calculations

ec2 instances is VM's(virtual machine) 


Multi-tenancy in Amazon EC2 refers to multiple tenants, or users, 
sharing the same instance but maintaining isolation for security and performance.

multitenancy = sharing underlying hardware between virtual machines each, vm is isolated
from each other but share's resource this isolation and resource sharing is done
by a software called hypervisor which is running on host machine.
(((CaaS)))

ec2 instances

-each ec2 instance type is grouped under an instance family
*general purpose
*compute optimized
*memory optimized
*accelerated computing
*storage optimized

bu instanceların yönetimi api call'lar ile yapılıyor

bu api calllarıda

aws management console(browser based),aws cli,aws sdk(python) ile yapabilirsin

ami = amazon machine image

vertical scaling adding more power to machines add power for per instance

horizontal scaling adding more resources 

amazon ec2 auto scaling adds or removes instance's based on demands and 
key scaling metrics buda başka bir aws service ile birlikte sağlanıyor
bunuda amazon cloudwatch service yapıyor



3 tane settingi var     ???
minimum,desired,maximum ???


load balancer = takes in requests and routes them to ec2 intances 
ama bunu configure ve manage etmen lazım bunun çözümü içinde

elastic load balancing (elb) devreye giriyor 
= designed to distribute network trafic to improve app scalability
can manage both internal and external trafic to aws

elb trafic distribution için farklı routing methodlar kullanır:
-round robin = distributes traffic evenly across all available servers
-least connections = routes trafic to the server with the fewest active connections
-ip hash = uses the clients ip add to consistently route traffic to the same server
-least response time = directs traffic to the server with fastest reponse time

__module 3__

ec2 is unmanaged service so u have to maintain the server itself 

elb,sqs,sns is managed service

serverless = you cannot see or access the underlying infrastructure


elb ve ec2 auto scaling birlikte kullanılır 

amazon simple queue service(sqs) = for buffer and loosely coupled app's
payload = data contained with a message

amazon simple notification service(sns) = a channel for messages to be delivered

aws lambda = serverless compute service also known as funciton as a service

u specify a trigger to run the lambda function

max duration of a lambda func is 15min

lambda is great for event-driven processes

while creating a lambda function u can write a func yourself,use a blueprint
,or use a container image

u must select execution rule

must select a policy template for permissions

must select a trigger

container = containers solve the "it works on my machine" portability problem by providing
a consistent env that can be replicated anywhere

amazon elastic container services (ecs) 
is a scalable container orchestration service for running and managing containers on AWS, like Docker containers. 
Docker is a software platform for building, testing, and deploying applications quickly.

amazon elastic kubernetes services (eks)
is a fully managed service for running Kubernetes on AWS. 
It simplifies deploying, managing, and scaling containerized applications using 
open-source Kubernetes, with ongoing support and updates from the broader community.

ecs,eks orchestrate containers;in other words orchestration services

amazon elastic container registry (ecr) = fully managed container registry that stores your container images
(Amazon ECR) is where you can store, manage, and deploy container images. 
It supports container images that follow the Open Container Initiative (OCI) standards.
You can push, pull, and manage images in your Amazon ECR repositories using standard container tooling and command line interfaces (CLIs).

a basic flow

* start uploading a container image to ecr
* choose your container orchestration service based on your needs ecs or eks
* select platform to run your container ec2 or fargate

fargate =Fargate is a serverless compute engine for containers. 
It works with both Amazon ECS and Amazon EKS. 
Fargate is a container hosting platform, unlike Amazon ECS and Amazon EKS, 
which are both container orchestration services.

additional compute services

elastic beanstalk(web applications,RESTful APIs,mobile backend services,microservices architectures,automated scaling,simplified infrastructure management),
aws batch(processing large-scale,parallel workloads),
lightsail(basic web apps,dev and testing environments,learning cloud services)

aws outposts is hybrid cloud solution

__module 4__

going global, aws infastructure
edge locations,az,regions
aws cloudformation is IaC

__module 5__

vpc = virtual private cloud help you provision a logically isolated section of the aws cloud
private,public

Subnets= chunks of IP addresses in your VPC that you can use to group resources together.
is used to organize resources, share resources publicly, 
or isolate resources to keep them private.

to allow trafic from the public internet to flow into and out
of vpc you must attach "internet gateway" to vpc 
internet gateway = is like a doorway that is open to the public 

virtual private gateway for private subnets

network access control list (acl) = checks traffic going into and leaving a subnet

subnet içindeki instance'ları kontrol etmediğinden her instance'sın da bir güvenliği olmalı
ec2 instance'larının default olarak security groupları vardır and by default all 
ports are blocked to in traffic but all out traffic is allowed

security groups are statefull(has memory)
network acl's are stateless (no memory)

amazon route 53 is the dns (domain name server)

amazon cloudfront = is a content delivery network (cdn) service that delivers
your content with faster loading times

aws global accelerator is a service that uses the aws global network to 
improve app availability,security,performance


__module 6__

--block storage = divides data into pieces called blocks,direct data access without system layers
best for app's that databases needing fast,freq. updates

Block storage provides persistent, low-latency block-level storage volumes that attach to EC2 instances like physical hard drives. 
Block storage volumes can be encrypted, backed up via snapshots, and modified while in use without disrupting the instance. 

AWS offers two primary block storage services:

*Amazon EC2 instance store
An unmanaged non-persistent, high-performance block storage directly attached to EC2 instances for temporary data.
best for temporary memory-based storage needs like buffers, caches, and scratch data
no data persistance

*Amazon Elastic Block Store (EBS)
A managed service that provides persistent block storage volumes for EC2 instances, offering various types for different workloads
data persistance

volumes attach to ec2 instances
availability zone(az) level resource
must be at the same az with to attach ec2 instances 
do not automatically scale up or down

-Amazon ebs snapshots are point-in-time backups of EBS volume.They can be used for disaster recovery, data migration, 
volume resizing, and for creating consistent backups of production workloads.
-EBS snapshots are incremental,so they only save the blocks on the volume that have changed after your most recent snapshot.
-EBS snapshots can be used to create multiple new volumes, 
and new volumes created from a snapshot are an exact copy of the original volume at the time the snapshot was taken.
Snapshots of EBS volumes are stored redundantly in multiple Availability Zones using Amazon S3.  

-Amazon Data Lifecycle Manager
You can automate the creation, retention, and deletion of EBS snapshots using Amazon Data Lifecycle Manager. 
Amazon Data Lifecycle Manager can schedule snapshots during off-peak hours to minimize performance impact and automatically delete outdated backups to control storage costs.
It's particularly valuable for large-scale deployments where manual snapshot management would be time-consuming and error-prone.


--object storage = each object includes data + uniqID + metadata(info about object)
full rewrite req. to update an object,
objects are organized in flat stucture called buckets
best for files dont change infreq.(videos,images,logs)

Object storage is a data storage architecture that manages data as objects in a flat address space.
It offers unlimited scalability so you can store vast amounts of unstructured data without worrying about capacity constraints.
Object storage provides enhanced metadata capabilities to provide more efficient data management, search, and analytics across massive datasets.

The following is the primary AWS object storage service:

*Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3)
A fully managed scalable object storage service for storing and retrieving any amount of data from anywhere.
store data as objects 
store objects in buckets
max object size of 5 tb
u can version objects  

An S3 bucket is a container for storing objects in Amazon S3.
Buckets have a globally unique name across all of AWS, which helps to identify and organize your stored data.
Buckets serve as the basic unit for access control and can hold a virtually unlimited number of objects.
They play a crucial role in data management by making it possible to group related objects and apply policies at the bucket level.

Storage Classes:

*S3 Standart 
S3 Standard is considered general-purpose storage for cloud applications, dynamic websites, content distribution,
mobile and gaming applications,and big data analytics.

*S3 Standard-Infrequent Access
S3 Standard-Infrequent Access (S3 Standard-IA) is for data that is accessed less frequently 
but requires rapid access when needed.This storage tier is ideal if you want to store 
long-term backups, disaster recovery files, and so on.

*S3 One Zone Infreq. Access
S3 One Zone-Infrequent Access (S3 One Zone-IA) stores data in a single Availability Zone, 
reducing costs compared to S3 Standard-IA, which uses three zones.
It's perfect for storing secondary backups or easily recreatable data.

*S3 Express One Zone

*S3 Glacier
-S3 Glacier Instant Retrieval
-S3 Glacier Flexible Retrieval
-S3 Glacier Deep Archive

*S3 Lifecycle Policies -> sets up policies to move data from classes to classes
*S3 Storage Class Analysis -> helps find us policies

*S3 Intelligent Tiering = This tier is useful if your data has unknown or changing access patterns
u dont need to set up policies 
automaticly moves data from 4 different tiers based on its how often the data is accessed
-Freq. Access
-Infreq. Access
-Archive Instant
-Access Deep Archive


*S3 Outposts
Amazon S3 Outposts delivers object storage to your on-premises AWS Outposts environment using Amazon S3 APIs
and features,and serves workloads with local data residency requirements. 


--file storage = cloud based access through shared file systems(hierarchical file sys)
straightfoward implementation without code changes
best for app's needing shared file access

AWS file storage services provide shared file systems accessible over networks, so multiple users and applications can access the same data simultaneously.
They offer scalability and flexibility so you can expand storage capacity as needs grow without managing physical infrastructure.

AWS offers two primary file storage services:

*Amazon Elastic File System (EFS)
A fully managed, scalable NFS file system for use with AWS Cloud services and on-premises resources.

multiple instances can access the data in EFS at the same time

when u create an efs it comes with preconfigured lifecycle policies

efs automatically moves data between storage classes

linux file system

regional resource not redundant to az

automatically scales

*Amazon FSx
A fully managed file storage services for popular file systems like Windows, Lustre, and NetApp ONTAP.

Choose Amazon EFS for simple, serverless Linux file sharing (NFS) across multiple EC2 instances. 
Choose Amazon FSx when you need a specialized, high-performance file system, require Windows (SMB) compatibility, or need advanced 
enterprise features like NetApp ONTAP, ZFS, or sub-millisecond latency for heavy database workloads

additional services that dont quite fit in a category:

*AWS Storage Gateway
A fully managed, hybrid-cloud storage service that provides on-premises access to virtually unlimited cloud storage.
AWS Storage Gateway = Storage Gateway is a hybrid cloud storage service that makes it 
possible to seamlessly integrate on-premises environments with AWS Cloud storage. 

-You can use it to extend your local storage to the cloud while maintaining 
low-latency access to frequently used data.

*S3 File Gateway = for s3

*Volume Gateway = creates block storage volumes locally data is backed up with ebs snapshots
Volume Gateway operates in two main configurations:

Cached volume mode stores primary data in the cloud while frequently accessed data is cached locally for low-latency access.

Stored volume mode locally keeps your complete dataset while asynchronously backing it up to the cloud as EBS snapshots.

*Tape Gateway = makes it possible to replace physical tape infrastructure with virtual tape capabilities while 
benefitting from the durability and scalability of AWS Cloud storage.

*AWS Elastic Disaster Recovery
A fully managed service that streamlines the recovery of your physical, virtual, and cloud-based servers into AWS.


__module 7__

amazon relational database services (rds)







